# Get started with Entity Framework Core in an ASP.NET MVC web app

This tutorial has not been updated for ASP.NET Core 6 or later. The tutorial's instructions will not work correctly if you create a project that targets ASP.NET Core 6 or 7.

## Entity Framework Core

Entity Framework (EF) Core is a lightweight, extensible, open source and cross-platform version of the popular Entity Framework data access technology.

EF Core can serve as an object-relational mapper (O/RM), which:

- Enables .NET developers to work with a database using .NET objects.
- Eliminates the need for most of the data-access code that typically needs to be written.

### The Model

With EF Core, data access is performed using a model. A model is made up of entity classes and a context object that represents a session with the database. The context object allows querying and saving data.

EF supports the following model development approaches:

- Generate a model from an existing database.
- Hand code a model to match the database.
- Once a model is created, use EF Migrations to create a database from the model. Migrations allow evolving the database as the model changes.

### Querying

Instances of your entity classes are retrieved from the database using Language Integrated Query (LINQ).

### Saving data

Data is created, deleted, and modified in the database using instances of your entity classes.

### EF O/RM considerations

- Intermediate-level knowledge or higher of the underlying database server is essential to architect, debug, profile, and migrate data in high performance production apps.
- Functional and integration testing: It's important to replicate the production environment as closely as possible to:
  - Find issues in the app that only show up when using a specific versions or edition of the database server.
  - Catch breaking changes when upgrading EF Core and other dependencies.
- Performance and stress testing with representative loads. The naïve usage of some features doesn't scale well.
- Security review: For example, handling of connection strings and other secrets, database permissions for non-deployment operation, input validation for raw SQL, encryption for sensitive data.
- Make sure logging and diagnostics are sufficient and usable.
- Error recovery. Prepare contingencies for common failure scenarios such as version rollback, fallback servers, scale-out and load balancing, DoS mitigation, and data backups.
- Application deployment and migration. Plan out how migrations are going to be applied during deployment; doing it at application start can suffer from concurrency issues and requires higher permissions than necessary for normal operation. Use staging to facilitate recovery from fatal errors during migration.
- Detailed examination and testing of generated migrations. Migrations should be thoroughly tested before being applied to production data. The shape of the schema and the column types cannot be easily changed once the tables contain production data.

## Data Seeding

### Model seed data

in EF Core, seeding data can be associated with an entity type as part of the model configuration. Then EF Core migrations can automatically compute what insert, update or delete operations need to be applied when upgrading the database to a new version of the model.

### Limitations of model seed data

This type of seed data is managed by migrations and the script to update the data that's already in the database needs to be generated without connecting to the database. This imposes some restrictions:

- The primary key value needs to be specified even if it's usually generated by the database. It will be used to detect data changes between migrations.
- Previously seeded data will be removed if the primary key is changed in any way.
Therefore this feature is most useful for static data that's not expected to change outside of migrations and does not depend on anything else in the database, for example ZIP codes.

If your scenario includes any of the following it is recommended to use custom initialization logic described in the last section:

- Temporary data for testing
- Data that depends on database state
- Data that is large (seeding data gets captured in migration snapshots, and large data can quickly lead to huge files and degraded performance).
- Data that needs key values to be generated by the database, including entities that use alternate keys as the identity
- Data that requires custom transformation (that is not handled by value conversions), such as some password hashing
- Data that requires calls to external API, such as ASP.NET Core Identity roles and users creation

### Manual migration customization

When a migration is added the changes to the data specified with HasData are transformed to calls to InsertData(), UpdateData(), and DeleteData(). One way of working around some of the limitations of HasData is to manually add these calls or custom operations to the migration instead.

### Custom initialization logic

A straightforward and powerful way to perform data seeding is to use DbContext.SaveChanges() before the main application logic begins execution.
